Saying "no" (#464)
MikeMcQuaid/mikemcquaid.com: _posts/2022-01-20-saying-no.md

I've developed a bit of a reputation inside and outside work as being pretty good with "saying no" and setting boundaries. In this post, I will help you do so, too.

> ### Why say "no"

Reviewer: Should this be a question? I'm not sure since it's a heading.
```suggestion
### Why say "no"?
```

I've been consuming a lot of Brené Brown's [podcasts](https://brenebrown.com/podcasts/) and read [one of her books](https://brenebrown.com/book/atlas-of-the-heart/) recently, and they've got me thinking about what's at the root of being able to say "no" regularly and well.

[![BRAVING Trust]({{ '/images/a/braving.jpg' | absolute_url }})](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/braving-trust-brené-brown/)

> Brown uses the [BRAVING acronym](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/braving-trust-brené-brown/) to refer to the elements of Trust. Out of these, the ones that jump out to me for saying no are boundaries, reliability and integrity. To meaningfully trust others on these axes, you cannot be someone who says yes to every request. In doing so, you maintain no boundaries, professionally or personally, and will not be a reliable coworker.

Reviewer: I thought you were an oxford comma man? 🤣 
```suggestion
Brown uses the [BRAVING acronym](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/braving-trust-brené-brown/) to refer to the elements of Trust. Out of these, the ones that jump out to me for saying no are boundaries, reliability, and integrity. To meaningfully trust others on these axes, you cannot be someone who says yes to every request. In doing so, you maintain no boundaries, professionally or personally, and will not be a reliable coworker.
```

Author: :trollface:

To the software engineers reading this, I'm sure we've all worked with some APIs that have been great and some that have been terrible. An API with inconsistent and unpredictable behaviour with the same inputs is terrible. A poorly documented API is terrible. An API that attempts to accommodate your request and consistently times out rather than failing immediately is terrible.

> Humans are like APIs in this regard. A bad API for your coworkers is to be someone who gives radically different estimates for the same work based on whether you want to impress the person or not. A bad API for your coworkers is when you state you're on holiday or sick but still appear in conversations and meetings anyway. A bad API for your coworkers is when you tell them a 19:00 meeting is fine, but you're hangry and irritable because you've missed dinner and your children's bedtime.

Reviewer: Just thinking of rewording this since I read it a few times. Also, this follows the pattern of the two other examples:
```suggestion
Humans are like APIs in this regard. A bad API for your coworkers is when you're someone who gives radically different estimates for the same work based on whether you want to impress the person or not. A bad API for your coworkers is when you state you're on holiday or sick but still appear in conversations and meetings anyway. A bad API for your coworkers is when you tell them a 19:00 meeting is fine, but you're hangry and irritable because you've missed dinner and your children's bedtime.
```

> A previous performance of mine from [a great manager](https://github.com/derekprior) started with the sentence "Mike is very strict with his boundaries". "Oh no", I thought to myself, "I'm going to get criticised for always prioritising being there for my children's dinner and bedtimes four nights of the week". Instead, he went on to say that this made me easier to work with, set an excellent example for other members of the team to not overwork and set expectations for new parents on the team. Ironically, in this case, my being a little more selfish with my time and strict with my boundaries produced an outcome that benefitted the entire team.

Reviewer: - I think you're missing `review` here
- I think you can remove the `my` here and it cleans it up a bit without losing any meaning
```suggestion
A previous performance review of mine from [a great manager](https://github.com/derekprior) started with the sentence "Mike is very strict with his boundaries". "Oh no", I thought to myself, "I'm going to get criticised for always prioritising being there for my children's dinner and bedtimes four nights of the week". Instead, he went on to say that this made me easier to work with, set an excellent example for other members of the team to not overwork and set expectations for new parents on the team. Ironically, in this case, being a little more selfish with my time and strict with my boundaries produced an outcome that benefitted the entire team.
```

> Having these boundaries clear and upfront is more complex but crucial for unexpected tasks. If you already feel overwhelmed or have too much to do when asked to do something new: you should say "no". If when asked for an estimate, [you can tell there's a bunch of complexity that was not considered by those who requested the estimate]({{ '/2021/11/29/hidden-complexities-of-software-estimation/' | absolute_url }}) and know that your realistic one will disappoint them: you should give them the realistic estimate.

Reviewer: - It seems like a comma might be needed here
- Might help clean up what felt like a long sentence
```suggestion
Having these boundaries clear and upfront is more complex, but crucial for unexpected tasks. If you already feel overwhelmed or have too much to do when asked to do something new: you should say "no". If when asked for an estimate, [you can tell there's a bunch of complexity that was not considered by the requester(s)]({{ '/2021/11/29/hidden-complexities-of-software-estimation/' | absolute_url }}) and know that your realistic one will disappoint them: you should give them the realistic estimate.
```

> I call this "front-loading disappointment". You're better to have a conversation about your full workload or longer estimate now when people can prepare for it than making them happy now and then disappointing them in a few months when you didn't deliver what they planned for you. I've also found it to be less disruptive for your organisation for you to give an estimated deliverable earlier than planned than later than planned.

Reviewer: - `It's` might work better here
- Perhaps a way to split up this long sentence
- `estimated deliverable` made me read it a couple of times, maybe this works better?
```suggestion
I call this "front-loading disappointment". It's better to have a conversation about your full workload or longer estimate now when people can prepare for it. Making them happy now and then disappointing them in a few months when you don't deliver what they planned for you is worse. I've also found it to be less disruptive for your organisation for you to deliver a project earlier than planned, rather than later than planned.
```

### When to say "no"

Ok, we've touched upon why you should say "no", so let's discuss when it's appropriate to do so.

> What's your current workload, the stress outside work and the number of commitments made to coworkers, family and friends look like now? What are your goals for the next 3-12 months and what's the best use of your time to achieve them? Regularly asking yourself these questions can help prime you to remind you of them when receiving a request.

Reviewer: the lack of oxford comma actually tripped me up here, thinking that there were three things to look at:
1. current workload
2. the stress outside work and the number of commitments made to coworkers
3. family and friends look like now

Not sure, but this might clean it up
```suggestion
What's your current workload, the stress outside work, and the number of commitments made to coworkers, family, and friends look like now? What are your goals for the next 3-12 months and what's the best use of your time to achieve them? Regularly asking yourself these questions can help prime you to remind you of them when receiving a request.
```

When a new request comes in, and you've asked yourself the questions above, you'll probably have a good sense of whether you can meet the needs and expectations of the requester or not. If you think you cannot right now: say "no".

> Don't worry about if you've been saying "no" a lot recently; this is not necessarily a problem. Of course, if you're saying no to every request from coworkers, friends and family, this could be a symptom of a broader problem. At work, though, it's pretty expected that there will be more demands on your time than your available time. If you're saying "no" a lot, but you're still delivering great work, and your coworkers and manager are happy with you: you're doing enough.

Reviewer: - sorry not sorry
- I was thinking it should be `pretty well expected` or maybe `fairly well expected`, but then I just thought `expected` by itself works and removes the question all together
```suggestion
Don't worry about if you've been saying "no" a lot recently; this is not necessarily a problem. Of course, if you're saying no to every request from coworkers, friends, and family, this could be a symptom of a broader problem. At work, though, it's expected that there will be more demands on your time than your available time. If you're saying "no" a lot, but you're still delivering great work, and your coworkers and manager are happy with you: you're doing enough.
```

### How to say "no"

> There's still a little bit of art involved in saying "no". It may be that your "no" actually means "no because ..., "no unless you ..." or "no if this ...". These "no"s may be conditional on you as an individual, the timing of the request, the scope of the request or many other reasons. Try to share your reasoning with the person who has requested this of you; it may be that something you understood as critical to the task is actually optional and can be removed given the extra context of a "no because ..." or "no unless ..." provides.

Reviewer: - 😶 
```suggestion
There's still a little bit of art involved in saying "no". It may be that your "no" actually means "no because ..., "no unless you ..." or "no if this ...". These "no"s may be conditional on you as an individual, the timing of the request, the scope of the request, or many other reasons. Try to share your reasoning with the person who has requested this of you; it may be that something you understood as critical to the task is actually optional and can be removed given the extra context of a "no because ..." or "no unless ..." provides.
```
